---
title: "The Eye of Sauron tax audits"
date: 2023-02-01T12:08:41-08:00
draft: false
---


Computer algorithms used by the Internal Revenue Service are apparently
biased against Blacks, according to a detailed analysis done by
experts, even though no racial information is contained in a taxpayers
return.[^1]

How can anyone, let alone a computer, be biased if there's nothing to be
biased about?

One explanation is that the algorithm was only really able to process
easy-to-process returns. For example, a return that did not include
business income. So if you don't have business income on your return,
you're more likely to get audited. This would be true regardless of
race, obviously, but since a disproportionately large number of Blacks
do not include business income on their returns, their returns are
'biased' against and so are more like to be audited.

So bias doesn't have to be conscious (no IRS human auditors were
involved) or intentional (no racial identifiers on the taxpayers
returns), and yet magic happens when we look at the numbers in detail.

If we turn the expert's _Eye of Sauron_ analysis away from the IRS for
a moment and shine it on another court, the Eye's lidless gaze reveals
even more bias.

For example, during basketball session it's clear Blacks are
disproportionally favored over Asians on the basketball court, even
though there is nothing to be gained by being biased. What does it mean
to be disproportionally favored?

It means one group, for whatever reason (a complicated tax return, for
example), appears to get more than they 'deserve'.

What baselines do we begin with in basketball to determine
disproportionality? The United States, by population, is of 6% Asian and
13% Black. In a fair world we expect to see similar proportions of the
population represented throughout society (maybe not exactly the same
proportions, but certainly not wildly out of whack proportions). And
yet, incredibly, when we look at the percentage of players by race in
the NBA, 1% are Asian and 73% are Black.

That's a glaring disproportionality if ever there was one. Obviously
Blacks are being favored whether they realize it or not.

(Note: There is also Asian/White disproportionality. Not all Asian
suppression can be attributed to Black privilege.)

Did slavery and Jim Crow and systemic racism somehow give Black players
_basketball super powers_? Maybe, that's one explanation, but truth be
told, we don't actually know.

But we don't have to know. Because we can see. And this glaring
disproportionality strikes many as racist and unfair and socially
unjust. If you just look at the numbers, you can see that it's wrong.

How do we fix the wrong? How do we stamp out the injustice? How do we
paper over nasty reverberations from the past and renovate our world
today?

One solution is to change the rules of basketball and give Asians five
points per basket instead of the usual two. This would likely encourage
the NBA to employ more Asians.

Another solution is to allow Asians to wear elevator shoes during the
game to bring them closer to the hoop, to make it easier to score, to
even the playing field so-to-speak.

Would that make the games more interesting? Maybe. I'm sure those
elevator shows would be a trip. The point is, it would make the
world more fair by reducing or eliminating Black/Asian basketball
disproportionality. And many of us assume that to be a good thing.
_Sauron's Lidless Eye_ reveals all.

One small step for an Asian man, one giant equity leap for humankind.


[^1]: "Black Americans more likely to face tax audits," by Jim
Tankersley, _The New York Times_, reprinted in _The Seattle Times_, Feb
1, 2023

