---
title: "Beware the Disproportionality Fallacy"
date: 2024-10-08T19:33:50-07:00
draft: false
---

## Life isn't fair

We all know life isn't fair, which is maybe why it's so easy for us
to continue using bad arguments to simplify situations into problems
easily solved if only everyone else could see as clearly as we. Case
in point, race relations in the United States.

Black Americans make up 12% of the general population, and yet they
account for 38% of the prison population.[^1]

Assuming that life should be proportional by race, that's an obvious
disproportionality. Furthermore, we know that Blacks used to be
slaves in this country (i.e., discriminated against), and so that
knowledge, coupled with this modern day disproportionality, can only
mean that Blacks are _still_ being discriminated against.

Right?

Isn't that the simplest, most straightforward explanation?

It's definitely simple and straightforward, but is it the most
likely explanation? Let's think about that.

In order to pick the most likely explanation, you must first be aware
of other possible explanations. Also it's possible that things are
not as simple as they seem; maybe several contributing factors come
into play.

What other factors, if any, might explain disproportionalities
between groups that we think should be treated proportionally?

The short answer is culture.[^2]

    "Culture can and does alter our brains, hormones, and anatomy,
    along with our perceptions, motivations, personalities,
    emotions, and many other aspects of our minds."

But isn't blaming 'culture', in this context, just another excuse for
racism? Well of course it _could_ be, but is it? (If you're intent on
seeing the world through racist lenses, then you will always see what
you're looking for.)

## Culture

Culture is the short answer. The longer answer is longer. What, then,
do we mean by 'culture'? For example:[^3]


 * Religious convictions can powerfully shape decision-making,
   psychology, and society.


 * Beliefs, practices, technologies, and social norms can shape our
   brains, biology, and psychology, including our motivations, mental
   abilities, and decision-making biases.

 * Psychological changes induced by culture can shape all manner of
   subsequent events by influencing what people pay attention to, how
   they make decisions, which institutions they prefer, and how much
   they innovate.


Culture then, is many things.

    education, religion, genetics, world history, ideology,
    family background, upbringing, socialization, etc.

In short, it's complicated.

But why not just take the easy approach and always assume that
disproportionalities _must_ point to problems to be solved?

Why?

Because in most other contexts, that would be silly.

For example, the US, by population, is 6% Asian and 13% Black. And
yet, incredibly, when we look at the percentage of players by race
participating in the National Basketball Association (NBA), we find
1% Asian, and 73% Black. That is a whopping disproportionality. Asian
discrimination? Structural racism? I don't think so.

Jews comprise 0.2% of the world's population, and yet they represent
22% of all Nobel prize recipients. Which is to say, Jewish laureates
outrank the world's population by 110 times in terms of
proportionality.[^4] Is this ethno-religious discrimination? I don't
think so.

Males hold most of the CEO positions in top-rated companies.
Discrimination against women?

As of 2022, 93% of the prison population were men, while 7% were
women. Female incarceration has risen over the past decades, but men
still make up the overwhelming majority of the U.S. prison
population. Is this obvious discrepancy discrimination against men?

Not necessarily. And that's the thing. It's easy for us to use bad
arguments to simplify problems, even when the world is complicated.
And so we fall victim to the disproportionality fallacy.

It may in fact be true that Blacks are still systemically
discriminated against in this country, but don't use
disproportionality as your proof, because if you do, then we'll end
up with goofy 'solutions' like affirmative action for White and
Asian NBA players -- you know, in order to make things more
proportional, more fair.

## Try harder

Try harder to understand. Things may not be as simple as they seem.

Beware the disproportionality fallacy.


[^1]: 2020 Census 
[^2]: The culture Quote is from "The Weirdest people in the world," by Joseph Henrich, page 5.
[^3]: Again from "The Weirdest people in the world," pages 16-17.
[^4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Jewish_Nobel_laureates
