---
title: "The parable of the squirrel"
date: 2021-08-11T16:31:59-07:00
draft: false
---




![squirrel on tree](/images/squirrel-on-tree.jpg)

## A ferocious metaphysical dispute

Some time ago, being with a camping party in the mountains, I
returned from a solitary ramble to find everyone engaged in a
ferocious metaphysical dispute.


The focus of the dispute was a _squirrel_ -- a live squirrel supposed
to be clinging to one side of a tree-trunk; while over against the
opposite side of the tree, a man was imagined to stand.

The man knows the squirrel is on the other side of the tree-trunk,
but he can't see the squirrel.

So the man tries to catch sight of the squirrel by running around the
tree, but no matter how fast he moves, the squirrel moves just as
fast, but in the opposite direction. So the squirrel always keeps the
tree between himself and the man. The man never sees the squirrel.

## Does the man go around the squirrel?

The resultant metaphysical dispute was this: Does the man go around
the squirrel?

He goes around the _tree_, sure enough, and the squirrel is _on_ the
tree; but does the man go around the squirrel?

In the unlimited leisure of the wilderness, and after draining a few
bottles of wine, the discussion had grown contentious. Which is to
say, everyone had taken sides.

## The controversy

Half said _yes_ the man goes around the squirrel. Half said, no, he
doesn't.

Yes, he does.

_No_, he doesn't.

They appealed to me to make it a majority, one way or the other.
Mindful of the scholastic adage that when you meet a contradiction,
it's often helpful to make a distinction, I did.

## What do you mean?

"It seems to me," I said, "that it comes down to what you _practically mean_
by 'going around' the squirrel."


"If you mean passing first from the north of him to the east, then to
the south, then to the west, and then to the north of him again,
obviously the man _does_ go around the squirrel, because the man
occupies those positions. He does exactly that."

"But if, on the other hand, you mean by 'going around' being first in
_front_ of the squirrel, then on the right of the squirrel, then
_behind_ the squirrel, then to his left, and finally in front again,
it's obvious the man fails to go around the squirrel, because the
squirrel keeps his belly turned towards the man the whole time. The
man never gets _behind_ the squirrel."

## The answer depends

"Make the distinction," I said, "and the argument is over. You are
both right and both wrong depending on what you mean practically by
the phrase 'goes around'."

For the most part everyone agreed: the answer depends upon what you
mean when you say, "_Goes around_."


----



### [original story version below]


----

## _PRAGMATISM: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking_[^2]
### By William James
### 1907

#### Chapter Two

Some years ago, being with a camping party in the mountains, I
returned from a solitary ramble to find everyone engaged in a
ferocious metaphysical dispute. The corpus of the dispute was a
squirrel -- a live squirrel supposed to be clinging to one side of a
tree-trunk; while over against the tree's opposite side a human being
was imagined to stand.

This human witness tries to get sight of the squirrel by moving
rapidly round the tree, but no matter how fast he goes, the squirrel
moves as fast in the opposite direction, and always keeps the tree
between himself and the man, so that never a glimpse of him is
caught.

The resultant metaphysical problem now is this: DOES THE MAN GO ROUND
THE SQUIRREL OR NOT? He goes round the tree, sure enough, and the
squirrel is on the tree; but does he go round the squirrel?

In the unlimited leisure of the wilderness, discussion had been worn
threadbare. Everyone had taken sides, and was obstinate; and the
numbers on both sides were even. Each side, when I appeared,
therefore appealed to me to make it a majority.

Mindful of the scholastic adage that whenever you meet a
contradiction you must make a distinction, I immediately sought and
found one, as follows: "Which party is right," I said, "depends on
what you PRACTICALLY MEAN by 'going round' the squirrel.

If you mean passing from the north of him to the east, then to the
south, then to the west, and then to the north of him again,
obviously the man does go round him, for he occupies these successive
positions.

But if on the contrary you mean being first in front of him, then on
the right of him, then behind him, then on his left, and finally in
front again, it is quite as obvious that the man fails to go round
him, for by the compensating movements the squirrel makes, he keeps
his belly turned towards the man all the time, and his back turned
away.

Make the distinction, and there is no occasion for any farther
dispute. You are both right and both wrong according as you conceive
the verb 'to go round' in one practical fashion or the other."

Altho one or two of the hotter disputants called my speech a
shuffling evasion, saying they wanted no quibbling or scholastic
hair-splitting, but meant just plain honest English 'round,' the
majority seemed to think that the distinction had assuaged the
dispute.


[^1]: From chapter 2 of: _Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of
Thinking_, by William James. Originally published in 1907

[^2]: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/5116/5116-h/5116-h.htm#link2H_4_0004


