---
title: "On 'Respecting' Personal Pronouns"
date: 2023-01-20T11:25:44-08:00
draft: false
---


If I'm asked, for example, to respect gay marriage (even if it's
against my religious beliefs) or to be kind and pay for curb cuts for
the handicapped, those requests don't require me to change my
behaviour (except for paying taxes for something I might disagree
with). But asking me to 'respect' your personal pronouns does require
me to act differently.

It changes the way I speak; it changes the words that I use. And not
because I decided to speak differently (I think I speak just fine,
thank you very much), but because someone else's ideology tells me to
speak differently, regardless of what I may think about that
ideology. Indeed I'm compelled to speak differently if I wish to
avoid being ostracized.

'Respect' then -- in this case -- is merely a social nicety layered
on top of a shit sandwich. Normally we have empathy ("can't we all
just get along", "language evolves", "times change", etc.). But it's
still just a shit sandwich because somehow it's all and only about
_my_ personal pronouns. You must respect _me_. The world is wrong and
_I'm_ the victim. We need to _fix_ things. Here, eat this (it's "my
way or the highway").

But my tastes are different.

If you want me to 'respect' your personal pronouns, here are some
words that align with my ideology, and I say this with all due
respect: go fuck yourself.
